The Joe Rogan experience you want to talk about? COVID I do. What are your,
what are your thoughts on that? What are your thoughts on the lockdown?
Yeah, well, let's put it this way. I'm I'm, uh,
I'm not speaking in a vacuum here. I've heard a certain amount of, uh,
your take and my take is a bit different. Um,
I am very concerned about SARS cov two.
I am not concerned about it because it is as lethal as we
feared. It might be, it isn't as lethal as we feared it might be,
but I'm afraid of it for other reasons. One,
it is brand new to us evolutionarily. It just showed up in human beings.
And so in my opinion,
we screwed up the lockdown badly because we went halfway that a
very short, very intense lockdown could have ended it. And that,
that would have been the smart thing to do.
And unfortunately the political will was not there,
but if you're, I am looking at New Zealand with utter envy,
can you imagine at this moment being free of SARS, cov?
Yeah. They nailed it, but they also have so few people.
Oh, they definitely had it easier,
but the point is they did prove it was possible. Yes. So in my opinion,
we should have locked down severely for six weeks or
something along those lines, and we should have driven it to extinction.
And the problem is that that runs a foul of all kinds of things,
including civil liberties concerns, which I also hold.
I hate the idea of a government crackdown in which they're dictating with whom
you associate and all of the rest. Right. I hated as much as anyone,
but we are dealing with a brand new landscape when it comes to
a global pandemic. And what's more,
we are dealing with a virus that I think is not what we have been told it
is how so. So I have, uh,
initially I thought that this was a bat born virus that had been
transmitted to people, um, from the wild,
probably through the bushmeat trade,
probably through the seafood market and Wilhelm. In fact,
Heather and I were in the Amazon where we had no connectivity to anything for a
couple of weeks. And when we came out, uh,
what was then called novel coronavirus was just beginning to be discussed.
And it, so we became aware of it as we came out of the Amazon, I was like, oh,
what the heck is that? Huh? And, uh,
I looked into it and immediately I saw the story adds up. You know,
it's a coronavirus of a kind that's known to circulate in bats.
There's a seafood market. And I thought, okay, I know what the story is.
And I tweeted, um, I don't know enough about the story yet,
but it looks to me like the wolfhound on seafood market is the source that the
virus comes from bats. And we have to talk about the bushmeat trade,
which has always been a terrible idea.
And immediately people tweeted back at me.
So you think just a coincidence that there's a biosafety lab,
level four in blue Han where this started and I thought, what,
that's a heck of a coincidence. And so I started to look into it.
I retracted the tweet and I said, maybe I don't know enough about the story yet.
And I started to look into it and I went down the rabbit hole because as much as
we have been assured by a huge range of experts,
that this has to have been, uh,
a bad born Corona virus transmitted to people, uh,
possibly through pangolin,
maybe through some intermediate hosts that we don't yet know that story
looks less and less likely.
And the story that is looking more and more likely what I would call the iLab
leak hypothesis is looking ever stronger. And anyway,
I've been in contact with other people who have reached that conclusion.
We have faced all kinds of pushback, but, um, in a sense,
again,
we still don't know it is possible that this came from the wild without human
meddling, but the,
the virus itself has several components that
suggest that it is actually the result of manipulation in the lab.
And that it escaped probably from the Wuhan Institute of virology,
but there's another lab in Wu Han. Um, it, uh,
it may well have escaped and we may be dealing with consequences
are the re of the, um, the fact that it was manipulated in the lab.
So one of the techniques that, uh, labs who study viruses like this,
that use something. So the research has called gain of function.
Research gain of function.
Research means you are taking a virus and you are adding a capacity
to it in order to study how it works.
And then one of the things that is done to study how it works is something
called passaging where a virus is infected.
A creature is infected with the virus,
and then the virus is allowed to pass between individuals of that
species.
It can also be done in tissues and cellular tissues where tissues are infected
and the virus is allowed to spread from one cell to the next.
And what happens is evolution. So
there is a strong possibility that this virus was under study,
that it was enhanced in the laboratory,
and that we are dealing with consequences that are the result of that
enhancement that make it more dangerous than it would have otherwise be. And.
What, what do you believe those enhancements are?
Well? So one of the enhancements, there is a, um,
something called a foreign site,
a Fern site in the genome of this virus for insights are not
known. It doesn't mean they don't exist,
but they're not known from other beta Corona viruses.
And this Fern site is conspicuous.
It's conspicuous in that it is in the genome as an insert,
rather than mutations of nucleotides that were there.
It's like somebody spliced it in. That's one thing which could happen naturally,
but, um, it may well not have,
and it has a flanking sequence which has, this is probably,
uh, going to be hard for people to follow,
but nucleotides that is DNA code for, uh,
proteins, which are made out of amino acids.
There's an amino acid called arginine.
And there are two Argentines coded for in the genome of this virus,
but because there are so many possible codes,
triplet codes and only 20 or so amino acids there's
redundancy.
And so which code is used to trigger the production of an, uh,
or the, the inclusion of an Argentine is variable.
And the two Argentines are coded for in a way that is not seen in,
in nature in this way very frequently.
So let's just say there are elements of the genome that are,
um, conspicuous and suggest possible laboratory manipulation. The,
for insight that I referred to that has been inserted either by a natural
process or by a laboratory process,
greatly increases the transmissibility of this virus,
which means various things.
It could be the explanation for why this virus is infecting so
many different tissues in people who get sick, right?
The list of symptoms is huge here,
and that's a very troubling thing from the point of view of treating it,
medically is all of the things that can go wrong with the body once you're
infected. Um,
it also means that the virus is very good at jumping between people and
that high transmissibility is obviously one of the things that makes,
uh, COVID-19 such a difficult pandemic to control, right?
It's hopping between people so readily that, uh, it just, it runs away.
So in any case, uh, and then there's a third question that I have,
which is maybe that there's something about the fact,
I don't want to say fact as if it is a fact,
but if this was an escape from the laboratory,
then the virus, I mean, just as you know,
maybe we'll end up talking about the telomere problem in mice, um,
which you spoke to Eric about when he was on your podcast last,
but evolution to the lab evolution in the lab takes place
and changes that the people in charge want to happen occur.
And then things they're not even thinking about occur,
there's adaptation to the laboratory environment.
The people who work in labs are on, on aware of.
And so one of the questions I have is this virus is highly transmissible,
unless you're outdoors, then it seems almost not transmissible.
That's a very conspicuous, I mean, for one thing, bats live outdoors, right? Um,
so is it possible that this virus has adapted to the
laboratory environment and indoor environment and that it has forgotten how to
get transmitted outdoors? And if we are casual about the outdoor environment,
that actually it could relearn that trick that we should take it. We a,
we need to be outdoors for various reasons. One,
it appears that vitamin D is very, um,
protective in the case of COVID-19 prevents the transmission and you end up way
less sick if you have proper vitamin D. So in the Northern hemisphere here,
while the sun is shining, we should be outdoors.
We should not be locking down those environments at all.
We should also be very careful outdoors, right?
Because any time we allow it to be transmitted outdoors,
that is going to at creates a evolutionary signal,
a selective signal,
that's going to retrain the virus to be transmitted outdoors,
which is not something we want at the moment.
This might be an advantage that we have,
and we're going to lose it if we're not careful,
which is why I'm very careful and why I wear this thing
around so that I, you know,
I can pull it up at a moment's notice if I'm going to talk to somebody. Um,
because even though I think the virus is very difficult to transmit outdoors,
which is something we've seen in the data out of South Korea, for example, um,
uh, it could learn that trick. And why.
Is it easier for it to turn? Do we know why no indoors? We don't know.
So we don't know the mechanism.
And there's no good reason that we don't know. We should know,
because it could be that it's UV light,
UV light is very powerful, destructive stuff,
but if it's UV light,
then that suggests it's difficult to transmit outdoors during the day.
And it should be easy to transmit outdoors at night. If it's not UV light,
then that's not likely to be it.
So there is something weird going on with viral load, or maybe it's not weird,
but it's,
it's weird for those of us who learned how viruses work from the usual textbook
diagrams, where a virus gets into a cell and triggers an infection. But here,
it seems like if you talk to someone briefly,
your chances of picking it up from them, even if they're sick is pretty low,
but if you talk to somebody for an extended period of time where you're
constantly breathing air, that they're exhaling, then your chances go up, up,
up and up. And that's. So.
There's a possibility that just the exposure to UV light as people are,
even if they're outside talking for the same amount of time,
just the fact that these particles are going through the air in the sunlight,
that it kills the virus's ability to transmit.
I don't know that that's what's going on. What I would say is, first of all,
uh, I do think I am very much in favor still of driving this
thing to extinction by being properly sober about it
briefly tonight.
Pause in addresses one issue that seems to be when, uh,
it seems to be an issue when someone says that it might have come out of a
lab, this is a right wing, left wing thing. For whatever reason,
you get labeled a right wing conspiracy theorist.
If you think it came out of a lab and you people on the left are
so they're so willing to dismiss that without any real
evidence for we've been poisoned by these,
these ideologies,
when it comes to conspiracy or whether or not something is actually true,
but we've been fed the wrong information that that stuff is,
if you don't believe the official narrative that's being discussed on CNN,
you must be some sort of a right-wing nut. Right. And, um,
have you faced that? Of course.
I've faced it. I've I've and I'm, it's hard to escape it, right?
So I've tried to be very careful. I have described it as a hypothesis,
which is what it is.
I have tried to show that there are different probabilities for the different
origin hypothesis. Even China now admits that it wasn't from the seafood market.
Do.
That. Oh yeah. What do they say? It's from, well, don't they say it's from us?
Uh, I have not heard that, but they, uh, let's put it this way. There are
one of the things that is, in my opinion,
the strongest piece of evidence that there, uh, that the lab leak, uh,
hypothesis may be correct is that there is a missing phase
in the evolution of this virus.
When a virus jumps from one species to another,
it is not well positioned.
It is typically very poor at its job because it doesn't have any
evolutionary experience with that host.
So it's not good at leaping between that host cells,
which means that it's always in very small numbers and it's not good at leaping
from one individual to the next.
That's the key question when something leaps into a new
species and then it becomes a pandemic it's because it has solved that second
problem.
It has figured out how to infect that creature in such a way that the creature
spreads it to others of its kind.
There is no evidence in the case of this virus that that happened.
It showed up in Wu Han and spread immediately.
It became pandemic. It already had experience.
Now how it got that experience.
We don't know there are evolutionary ways this could have happened, right?
It could be that we have not found the initial population that it's
circulated in, right.
Or it could be that it circulated in a creature that we haven't found either.
But the fact that there is no evidence that it shows up in Wu Han and
immediately spreads, um,
tells us that this virus was well adapted to
ourselves and well adapted to transmit between individuals.
And that is conspicuous.
One way you could get there is if somebody's a had added
components to virus in order to make it transmissible to humans.
So the research in question would be research that was interested in discovering
what a pandemic in humans have a bad born Corona virus would be like,
so that we could do something about it. Maybe we could prevent it.
Maybe we could create a vaccine ahead of time,
but if you're creating a virus that has enhanced capacity to infect
humans in order to study,
what will happen if a virus ever escapes into the human population,
then you are running the risk that the virus you were studying will escape.
Would they have added something like a Fern site? Absolutely.
It is established in the literature that the addition of a Fern site makes the
virus much more transmissible in human tissue. So if you were going to study it,
this would be high on your list of things.
Do you could also passage it through human tissue
in order to effectively train it on,
uh, the infectious pathway inside of people, which again,
we might be suffering the downstream consequences of that.
If it escaped the Wuhan Institute of virology.
So these things have an amazing impact. And I hear a lot that, um,
what does it matter? It's with us now, we just have to deal with it,
which is nonsense because a, we need to have, it never happened again.
Be there may be things that we could understand about what its nature is that
would help us, but see,
we have a really serious problem now because all but a few of the world's
leading virologists,
the experts in Corona viruses in particular have sworn
that this must've come from nature and couldn't have come from the lab,
which is nonsense. Why do you think they did that? Unfortunately,
this goes back to, uh, clear discussion.
Our scientific system is broken. We need our scientists to be empowered,
to tell us what we need to know. And we need them therefore,
to be freed from a system where they are fighting for grant money in
order to continue their work.
This entire group of people is now in jeopardy.
Because if this turns out to have been a leak from the lab,
then we were all suddenly going to become aware that gain of function research
puts humanity in jeopardy.
That one accident in gain of function research can cause the evaporation of who
knows how many trillion dollars it could cause.
And this is one of the other things I wanted to say to you about the danger of
letting this virus run. Of course, if we don't stamp it out,
I don't know that people who have been infected are not going to continue to
have, uh, outbreaks. We don't know that yet.
We don't know whether or not people who've had,
it are going to be immune to it in the future. That's probable,
but it's not certain.
And we don't know that it's not going to become a permanent fellow
traveler of humanity the way flu is.
And even if this thing evolved to become flu,
like if it became as unserious as the flu,
the flu is very serious.
And the cost that humanity pays for having flu circulate every year
is immense.
So even if the only thing that has happened in the longterm,
if we let it go and it evolved into another flu, like a pathogen,
then we have increased the number of flu,
like pathogens that we have to deal with annually substantially.
And that would be a major loss to humans.
So my sense that we should be much more aggressive about dealing with this
is really about the fact that I think we have a short time
horizon in which to deal with it,
that it will learn new tricks and it will become harder to defeat the longer
that we, uh, play around with it.
And so an aggressive short-term move. It's really, you know,
it's the lesson of pulling off the bandaid.
We're not doing ourselves any favors by pulling it off slowly. Um,
what do you think we should do right now? Well, I would say, I mean,
the problem is,
is a much harder argument to make now than it was at the beginning because we're
all so frickin sick of lockdown. I mean,
Portland is still under full lockdown. Um.
But not when it comes to protests. Well, of course not.
That's the other problem, right?
There's a massive hypocrisy in the way we were treating businesses versus
treating protests.
Uh, it's an epidemic of hypocrisy.
Not only that,
the Blasio in New York city won't allow people when they're asking people that
have tested positive for COVID-19.
You're not allowed to ask them whether or not they've been in a protest.
So they're doing contact tracing without valuable data because they,
they want to be progressive. That's insane. Oh, he's insane. Yes.
So you asked me what I would do. Um, I would, and again,
I don't want to be in this position, you know, months in here,
I want to be in this position months ago of saying the right thing to do is a
six week lockdown. That will be unbearably painful,
but hopefully it'll be short and then intense contact tracing.
But we've done a lockdown with essential businesses open. Well, we've done this,
not a real lock. They've.
Done a half-assed lockdown.
And the thing that we've done that I find the most troubling
is that we have not bootstrapped a mechanism for,
um, high quality ubiquitous testing.
Because if you want to do, if you did a six week lockdown,
a real lockdown, right, hold your breath and get through it.
And then you open back up with testing.
That's so high quality and so universal that you can spot anything that happens
and you can treat it locally, right?
You don't come into work if you don't pass this test.
And if your work puts you in contact with other people,
we're going to test your regularly, right? If you did that,
we could have driven it to very low levels.
And then we could have dealt with the flare ups.
But what we're doing now is we're just gambling and it's insane,
right? We're gambling. And there is no that I can detect.
There is no movement that says open back up
and be very aggressive about things like masks. My feelings.
If you're pushing open back up,
you ought to be pushing things that would make opening back up as safe as
possible.